---
layout: episode_notes
title: "0: Introductory Lesson"
episodeIndex: 1
permalink: /0
---

Reboot episode listed to on 1/2/2025. Feels so odd to type that new year number out!

The Bible is full of my favorite thing: DATA! But not all of it is text. 

This introduction juxtaposes the wester and eastern perspectives, or really, a western perspective against a Hebraic perspective, and challenges the listener to consider the authorial intent and context that the Bible is written in, which is a mostly eastern/Hebraic perspective. This worldview often uses poetry rather than prose, and images and numbers rather than text, so we need to re-examine the text we love so much and think more about who/what/when/where/why it was written. 

An important distinction: we want to learn how to THINK Hebrew, but we are not striving to BECOME Hebrew. 

God has always been interested in all nations. He is interested in UNITY, but not UNIFORMITY. 
 We do not need to ABANDON western thinking; rather, we need to do our best to expand our understanding  of the Bible as it was written. For example, if someone wrote a story today and mentioned the Super Bowl, no explanation would be necessary because everyone, everywhere, knows what that is NOW. However, if we were writing a story in Bible times, we’d need to clarify that what we’re talking about isn’t a gigantic bowl but rather a sporting event. In the same way, there were things in Bible times that everyone, everywhere knew that, in order for us to understand its full meaning, we will need to study and learn more about in order to get the full picture.

Two metaphors, attributed to Ray van Der Laan:
1. Observing a room through a window, but then coming back years later to look at that same room, but from a window on the other side. You would see things that you did not see before. Your earlier perspective was not wrong, but it was incomplete.
2. Piano playing Old Macdonald Had a Farm in first the left hand and then the right - each on their own, the sound is not full or is unclear what the song is, but together, the song is both full and recognizable. 
It’s not that one perspective is RIGHT and the other is WRONG, but that without them BOTH, the picture is not complete. 

Sometimes we will need to give ourselves time to study and percolate on old/new perspectives to settle on what IS the complete picture. The reference to Jesus’ analogy of pouring new wine into old wine skins is referenced. We should be stretching our mental models to make room for more of an eastern perspective (Loran’s observation there).

	Western (Greek)	Eastern (Hebrew)
Numbers	quantity	Quality (example: 5 apples representing 5 Books of Moses)
Eternal life	Starts when this world is over; quantity. Detached from this world.	Life lived in harmony with God, attached/within this world. Olam habah (Hebrew) and eon zoay (Greek)
Sense of self	Individual	Communal
Error and Sin	Wrong belief or incorrect thinking - emphasizes what a person KNOWS - individualistic. Word metanoyah in Greek referring to repentance as a change of MIND	Wrong behavior - emphasizes what a person DOES - communical in nature
God’s existence	Questioned, must be proven (Note: the Bible is often used to try and prove God’s existence, but that was not it’s intent .. “When we ask questions the Bible isn’t asking, we always get wrong answers”	Assumed (because authors are describing their experiences with God, not trying to persuade their audience that He exists)
God Described	Nature of the being (abstract)	Nature of the relationship (concrete)
Faith	Intellectual (attempts to rationalize)	Relational - no attempt to explain, just give testimony (with the caveat that Hebrew people LOVE to provide explanations)
Ultimate truth	Rational/scientific - belief through THOUGHT	Religious/experiential - belief through EXPERIENCE
Truth over Time	Static/unchanging	Unfolding (which is NOT the same as relative)

This idea of truth unfolding over time - I really love this. The kids like to describe themselves as being “locked in” when studying for a test or working in a focused mindset. I wonder, how many Christians are similarly so focused on “locking in” to the truth they know that they miss the truth that is unfolding right before our eyes, in the news, in our culture, and in the world around us? We need this eastern perspective in order to, at the same time, cling to what we know AND reach for what is yet to be known. 

Key takeaways or questions I have:
1. In what ways am I preferring static knowledge over unfolding truth?
2. In what ways am I abandoning old truths because I prefer new ideas?
3. How can we, as a community of believers, encourage new exploration and expansion of thinking WITHOUT abandoning old knowledge that served prior generations well?

