---
layout: episode_notes
title: "2: Knowing When to Say Enough"
episodeIndex: 3
permalink: /2
---
- Genesis 2 and 3
- Genesis 2:4
  - We run into problems again if we read the Bible literally.
    - Problems are put in the story ON PURPOSE and invite us to ask WHY.
    - This creation story doesn't pick up where we left off.
    - This is the same creation story being told but is told from a different perspective.
  - "Both trees are in the middle of the garden."
    - The Hebrew reads that the tree of life is in the middle of the garden and not the other.
    - There is a rabbinic tradition that explains when Eve meets with the serpent and she says we cannot eat from the tree of knowledge in the MIDDLE of the garden, it's actually not in the middle, however, she has made it the center of HER garden.
    - The Hebrew gives enough latitude to put the tree of knowledge ANYWHERE in the garden. It may be next to the tree of life or somewhere else entirely.
  - The rivers: Less and less important as you descend the list. One river in the Hebrew flows in a circle. Rain has not fallen yet and comes from the ground but it also comes from rivers?
    - Pishon, Gihon, Tigris, Euphrates
    - Names are important.
  - G-d brings all of the animals to Adam to name them.
    - Is it because Adam is lonely?
    - No suitable helper could be found.
      - G-d take his "rib" which really means "around" so G-d simply takes some part of humanity.
        - Adam named her Ish-ah. Male = Ish. Female = Ish-ah.
        - Eve also bares G-d's image.
        - The idea with Ish and Ish-ah is that a part of humanity is missing, and from it is created another being that completes humanity.
      - Loneliness isn't good because we need tension in life.
        - Helpmate is a bad translation. Ezer k’negdo - sounds like Et-ser Co-neg-do.
          - Et-ser means help
          - Co-neg-do means against or opposition
          - She is the help that comes against him or the help that opposes
          - Too much support and no opposition is not "good"; likewise, too much opposition and no support is not "good". We need both - a supportive tension - in order to have a complete humanity.
          - Healthy "help that opposes" looks like a spouse coming alongside and calling out the GOOD in their spouse, or saying "that's not who you are - you are GOOD" when they are going off the path.
          - It wasn't good for humanity to be alone so G-d takes a part of man and fashions woman and she is the part that is now missing from man. He is now incomplete without her.
          - Only when male and female are together do you see humanity in its fullness. Not just in marriage. If you have a room full of women, you're missing a large piece of humanity.
          - The woman opposes us but in her opposition, she is our greatest help.
            - Rabbis depict two 2x4s leaning against each other; if one is taken away, they both fall down.
            - Blind submission to a man is not was Genesis teaches.
            - There is no plank that stands by itself.
        - A man leaving his mother and father for his wife goes against betov.
      - Eve was not present when G-d instructed Adam to not eat of the trees. It seems Adam has added to G-d's instruction and communicated to Eve to not even touch the fruit. Or maybe they decided this together as a safety. Obviously, not effective.
Genesis 3
  - Problem: talking (probably walking) snake
  - woman sees that the fruit is "desirable for gaining wisdom"
  - themes of nakedness and desire
    - word play going on here in the Hebrew:
      - nakedness (arowm) was not a problem until they ate the fruit
      - desire (erowm) equates to what the animals do - they desire, then they act. humanity is intended to be better.
      - crafty/cunning/shrewd (eruwm) describes the serpent
    - sometimes we think we're being shrewd when really we're just naked ... or acting on our base desires
  - WHY does G-d do this - put something tempting in the garden?
  - serpent's words ring true-er in this story, in some ways, than G-d's
    - did not die immediately
    - did gain wisdom (of sorts)
  - When G-d asks "where are you?" it is not because he does not know where Adam is; it's because Adam is not where G-d expects him to be
    - Example:
      - "Where are my keys?" When you don't know
      - "Where are my keys?" When they aren't on the key hook where you normally leave them
  - at beginning of Gen 2, when Adam was alone, all of the animals were paraded in front of him
    - no helper found - why? because Adam is not a beast.
    - mark of humanity: made in the image of G-d
  - el Shaddai is a weird name for G-d, but it's what is used
    - "The God who knows when to say enough"
    - to be made in G-d's image is to know when to say enough; to not be run by our desires, but able to say enough
    - self-control as a fruit of the spirit, is knowing when to say enough
  - When G-d finds them, naked, he asks "Who told you that you were naked?"
    - Who have we been listening to?
    - Why do we question what G-d says?
    - G-d does not placate or diminish their shame; he meets them there in it.
    - The covering G-d supplies for them is from a slain animal. Apparently gathering and sewing fig leaves was not sufficient.
      - Loran: could this be because we must die to some desires in order to cover our own shame?

  Thoughts after hearing this lesson:
  1 - How am I meeting others in their shame? Do I placate or over-cover them, or do I sit with them in their discomfort and then help them slay the desires that try to rule them? 
  2 - How am I providing oppositional support to my spouse? Am I too encouraging or too oppositional in this season? Am I calling out the good in him, or just bludgeoning him to get my own way?
    
