---
layout: episode_notes
title: "3: Master the Beast"
episodeIndex: 4
permalink: /3
---
- Genesis 4
- fear and shame ruin the story
- Cain and Abel
  - Cain is the first born, in Hebrew this would be known as the `bekhor`.
  - This can be read one of two ways.
    - Eve names Cain in spite of Adam... "Look what _I've_ done without my husband...I and the Lord."
    - From Foreman
      - Cain means `aquired`
      - Aquired is not typically used when you do something on your own. Instead you use it when you get something that you couldn't get on your own. That is, something that is likely given to you. (like an inheritance)
      - Marty thinks that Eve names him Cain because, "only because of God's help have I been able to aquire" and not out of spite toward Adam.
      - Here is the thing about Hebrew names: A name isn't just a name... your name was your essence and your destiny and it was something that you would live out.
        - One would live out his name in either a positive or negative sense.
  - We are not told why God looked upon Abel's portion with favor and he doesn't look at Cain's offering with favor.
    - Problems with this story?
      - God did not ask for an offering
      - How does Cain know what to bring?
      - What does "favor" even mean, in the context of this story?
      - What kind of father would prefer a gift from one child over the other especially when they were not asked to bring gifts?
        - This store seems to go against everything we know so far about God as a God of love, compassion, acceptance.
        - This story has to be about something else...
    - The word "desire" appears again when God tells Cain that "sin crouches at the door, its desire is for you, but you must rule over it"
      - "Its desire is to have you but you must master it."
      - Does Cain's name give us insight into this story?
        - Cain's whole legacy is about acquiring. Everything Cain has, he has acquired.
          - Spun in a bad way, if fear enters the equation, there may be worry that what I bring may not be enough.
            - If fear gets in the way and he sees little brother that is winning the admiration of dad, he begins to see brother as a threat and doesn't feel accepted by God.
            - Fear ends up being the antithesis of trust and it paralyzes of from being able to trust the story and celebrate the provision of God.
            - Cain is afraid his production isn't good enough... just like we learn from the story in Genesis 2 and 3.
    - Cain kills his brother and God curses him.
      - His curse resembles the curse of Adam.
      - God asks Cain why he is downcast. A question with obvious answers: His mother sinned and now humanity has fallen and hopeless and he's angry because he hasn't pleased God...
        - This tells us that God's position on humanity has not changed but humanity's position on themselves has.
        - We ended Episode 2 talking about their shame, how God meets them where they are at and gives them clothes.
    - Looking closely at the story so far we know:
      - The story never says God has not been separated from humanity
      - The story tells us that they have only been removed from the "Garden of Delight"
      - The story has not told us that the nature of humanity has changed at all.
      - The story has not told us that sin has entered humanity
      - The story HAS told us that humanity's position on themselves has changed.
        - They now have shame
        - They now are downcast
        - They now have anger
      - God tells Cain not to let those things get in his way. God still believes that Cain can do everything he needs to do.
      - God tells Cain, just do what's right. I don't love Abel more because I liked his offering more.
      - Cain, you are not a beast. Sin is crouching at your door and you are intended to master it.
      - This story ends in tragedy.
      - This story defines God's position on people before/after they make mistakes.
        - Before: "Cain, don't let sin rule over you - if you do what's right, you'll be accepted too"
        - After: "Cain, I won't kill you, but you will have to pay for what you've done" 
    - Reiterating the discussion on the different words/meanings for "where" in the last episode (when God asks Adam where he is, and now asks Cain where his brother is)
      - Where are my keys? I have no idea where they are...
      - Where are my keys? They were right here and now they are in the wrong place... Where did they go.
  - Part of what it means to be human, to be made in the image of God (El Shaddai), is to know when to say ENOUGH to
    - shame
    - fear
    - desire


Texts to Study:
  - Genesis 1-4

Resources to Remember:
  - Rabbi David Foreman's book, The Beast That Crouches At The Door goes into a lot of great detail about this story.
  - "The Favor of God" by John Bevere: This book discusses the concept of divine favor and how it applies in the lives of believers today.

Main take-aways or questions that I have:
1. Does the name Abel have meaning, in contrast to the meaning of the name Cain in this story?
- Associated with "breath", "vapor", or "vanity" and carries connotations of transience and fragility in Hebrew tradition
- Cain went on to acquire cities and family ... while Abel perished; does not seem fair at all
2. What does having God's favor mean, both in the context of this story, and in the context of life?
- Jesus found favor with both God and man ... and yet he died too (like Abel)
- maybe I DON'T want God's favor, if it leads to an untimely death? just kidding. see resources above for more study on what this means
3. How can I cultivate a mindset of Trust? I know I have needs, and that I depend on God and others to meet those needs, but what can I do to make sure that I am not operating out of a mindset of fear/shortage? I know that operating out of trust will help prevent me from seeing others as a threat, and bring blessing into my life and the lives of those around me, but I find it very easy to slip back into seeing constant, pervasive lack. 
- Learn how to PLAN better (spend time planning purchases, etc, instead of reacting reflexively)
- Learn how to state end goals/imagine end states, and stay there and meditate on them when feeling overwhelmed
- Learn how to say NO when invited to do or buy things that are not aligned with where I want to go