---
layout: episode_notes
title: "4: His Bow in the Clouds"
episodeIndex: 5
permalink: /4
---
- [Genesis 6-9](https://my.bible.com/bible/111/GEN.6.NIV)
- When we read this story, we notice problems.
  - Brent: Every inclination of the people were evil all of the time... except Noah. There has to be someone out there doing something right.
  - Kevin (pre-reboot): The earth is corrupt, not just people.
    - Marty: Evil started with people but has begun to spread to the earth and everything around it.
  - Kevin: Why would G-d detroy the world?
    - Marty: Many people point out the G-d's goodness ends here.
      - Flood stories were not unique to the Bible and many of these predate the writing of the Bible.
      - When so many differing groups tell similar stories, it leads historians to ask the question, did something actually happen?
      - The characters in the Samarian story are the exact same as those in the Bible: Noah, Shem, Ham, Jepheth.
      - The epic of Gilgamesh is also relevant. The hero Gilgamesh is on a journey where he meets all of these gods of the land. As he meets each of these gods, they get angry and try to destroy the world with a great flood. However, there is one man, Utnapishtum from Mesopatamia (of Caldea), who builds a boat and loads it with pairs of animals to outsmart the gods and save humanity. This place is where Abraham will be from (i.e. from Ur of the Chaldeans) whose decendants will receive the book of Genesis. It makes sense that the writers of Genesis would retell this story that they were used to by painting their G-d in a different light showing who he really is. Kevin asks, why would G-d destroy humanity? All of the gods tried to destroy humanity, our job is to determine what is different about the G-d of the Bible from the gods these other flood naratives.
      - Elle pulls out a translation of the Gilgamesh story:
        -“In those days, the world teemed, the people multiplied, the world bellowed like a wild bull, and the great god was roused by the clamor. Enlil heard the clamor, and he said to the gods in counsel, the uproar of mankind is intolerable and sleep is no longer possible by reason of the babble. So the gods agreed to exterminate mankind.”
        - Marty: No partnership between G-d and mankind here ... 
        -“These are the measurements of the bark as you shall build her. Let her beam equal her length. Let her deck be roofed like the vault that covers the abyss. Then take up into the boat, the seed of all living 24 creatures.”
        -“Nergal pulled out the dams of the nether waters. A stupor of despair went up to heaven when the god of the storm turned daylight to darkness, when he smashed the land like a cup. One whole day, the tempest raged, gathering fury as it went. It poured over the people like the tides of battle.
        -“Man could not see his brother nor the people be seen from heaven. Even the gods were terrified at the flood. They fled to the highest heaven. They crouched against the walls, cowering like curs.”
- One phrase found and the beginning and end of the story, signaling a chiasm: “Every inclination of the human heart all the time was evil.”
- The chiasm in the story is also identified by the numbers:
  - The Numbes
    - 7
    - 7
    - 40
    - 150
    - Center: 8:1 God remembers Noah
      - Ruah: Wind/Spirit/Breath. From Gen 1
      - “But God remembered Noah and all the wild animals and the livestock that were with him in the ark and he sent a wind over the earth and the waters receded.”
    - 150
    - 40
    - 7
    - 7
  - Summary
    - This story mirrors the creation story.
    - After the wind, Noah opens a window and LETS IN THE LIGHT
    - Rain stops, a vault is created. (water above, water below)
    - Dry ground then appears.
    - Noah sends out a raven--birds are in the air.
    - Day 4 is tricky finding the moon and the stars. There is midrash about this.
    - Next there is a dove, that comes back with an olive branch. Then does not come back.
    - Then the animals leave the ark
    - Then man leaves the ark.
    - Then we should have a sabbath.
      - A sabbeth from creation in chapter 1
      - A sabbeth from destruction here ?
    - INSTEAD... Verse 8-17:
      - Lots of repetition in this section. Covenant, never again will there be a flood, ...
        - Covenant 7
        - Earth 7
        - Clouds 5 (in hebrew)
        - Rainbow 3
        - All of these numbers are odd and odd numbers have a center. 
        - A mini chiasm in a larger chiasm
        - All of the center occurances of these words create an entire sentance.
          - Verse 14-15: "`14` Whenever I bring clouds over the earth and the rainbow appears in the clouds, `15` I will remember my covenant..."
          - God is omniscient ... he does not forget ... rather, a sign is a reminder of something ...
        - The Hebrew refers to a "bow" rather than a rainbow.
          - Bows are weapons and they face toward the target.
          - This bow is pointed toward G-d.
          - This entire paragraph is about a god who knows when to stop destroying in the same way that the Sabbath was about a god who knows when to stop creating.
            - Cancer is so bad because it never stops creating.
        - Covenants: Suzerain Vassal covenants
          - The Suzerain is the more powerful participant and the Vassal is the less powerful participant. If the covenant is broken, the Vassal becomes the servant of the Suzerain. It's also the responsibility of the Vassal to produce the sign of the covenant. If the Vassal cannot produce the sign, the Suzerain can do whatever they want.
          - In this scenario, the Suzerain keeps the sign in the clouds, it will be a bow that points toward the Suzerain, and will help BOTH parties to remember the covenant.
          - In the ancient world, the Vassal had to remind the Suzerain but G-d wants US (the vassals) to remember. Even when the people forget, G-d will remember. Compared to the gods in the epic of Gilgamesh. Utnapashtum has to trick the gods to save creation but in THIS story, G-d comes to Noah and says, I want to partner with you to save creation.
          - G-d IS NOT ANGRY. The god that is trying to destroy creation is simultaneously trying to save it.
          - At the beginning of the story, God says he regrets making humanity because "every inclination of the human heart is evil." At the end of the story, God says, "even though every inclination of the heart of man is evil, **I WILL NOT DESTROY THE EARTH.**"
            -Reboot extension: “Even when you don’t pay your tribute, you don’t pay your taxes, you don’t levy all of this praise about my greatness, even then the arrow is loosed towards me rather than toward you. And I will yet come and rescue you from yourself, “even though every inclination of your heart is toward evil.”
