Episode 442
Marty Solomon and Brent Billings join Elle Grover Fricks to contextualize Jesus’s teaching on divorce in its Jewish and Roman landscape.

Goal is to contextualize marriage during Jesus' day, to better understand where he was coming from when he made statements about marriage and divorce.

Notes on Jewish marriage
Husband required to give wife a certificant of divorce (a 'get'). Deuteronomy 24:1
Talmudic justification for this action was pretty wide - hearing the list made me want to rage, honestly. 
Also rage-inducing ... reading about extramarital affairs and how they are handled for men vs women. According to the Jewish Women's Archive, many modern Jewish women are willing to ignore the religious requirements of divorce but will not bear children thereafter due to the stigmatization of the Jewish community against a child born out of wedlock.

Notes on Roman marriage
Three types:
1. Upper class - rarely divorce unless for political reasons. Requirements of ceremony included father handing daughter to her husband, eating cake, and having at least 10 witnesses present
2. Middle class - Requirements of ceremony included father handing daughter to her husband, eating cake, and having at least 5 witnesses present
3. Most common, similar to our common-law marriages - if two parties live together, they are considered married and if one moves out, they are considered divorced

All of this marriage and divorce contextualization seems very much in favor of the men, to be honest. Jesus may have been leveling the playing field by challenging men, instead of divorcing, to dig deeper and give more rather than look for the easy way out of their problems. 